# Reading Triplet Data

``` r
library(tripletTools)
```

This package contains a set of functions to aid analysis of data from
*triadic comparisons* or *triplet* tasks. See the *tripletTools
Overview* vignette for demonstrations of the various tools.

This vignette describes how to read new data into R in a format that
works with the package, and describes how the raw data file should be
structured.

## Data file structure and naming conventions

The functions make use of two kinds of data files: *triplet data files*,
which contain information about each trial of a tradic comparison task,
and *embedding files*, which contain the coordinates of each item in an
embedding computed from triplet judgment data.

### Triplet data files

Triplet data files are `.csv` files generated by the software used to
collect triplet judgment data. The first row should be a header
specifying column names. Each subsequent row then records key
information for each trial of a triplet experiment. Typically data from
all participants in a given study are included in a single triplet data
file.

The triplet data file must be a `.csv` file and must contain columns
with the following names:

- *worker_id*: Arbitrary identifier for each participant
- *rt*: Response time for the trial
- *Center*, *Left*, *Right*: Strings indicating the items appearing in
  the center (target item), left side (option 1) and right side (option
  2).
- *Answer*: String indicating which option the participant chose.
- *sampleAlg*: ALgorithm used to sample the item: either random,
  validation, or check.
- *sampleSet*: Indicates whether the triplet was used to fit the
  embedding (train) or not (test).

The data file can also contain any other fields. Often data will include
an integer encoing of the triplet information with the following column
names:

- *head*, *winner*, *loser*: Integer indices for each item appearing in
  the triplet

Data in this format can be read into the current session using the
function `get_combined(fname)` where `fname` is the path to the data
file. This function returns a named list, where each element includes
the triplet judgment data from a single subject, and elements are named
by the subject identified. This package includes an example dataset in
this format, `cfd_triplets`:

``` r
head(cfd_triplets[[1]])
#>   head winner loser worker_id   rt            Center              Left
#> 1   15      6     0     78972 8728 CFD-BM-038-007-HO CFD-BF-002-004-HO
#> 2   29     31    33     78972 9946  CFD-WM-023-015-F  CFD-WM-033-014-A
#> 3   11     28    34     78972 6598  CFD-BM-002-016-A  CFD-WM-023-012-A
#> 4   32     14    16     78972 4908  CFD-WM-033-053-F  CFD-BM-009-009-F
#> 5   24     31    28     78972 8271  CFD-WF-026-008-A  CFD-WM-033-014-A
#> 6    2     23    20     78972 8812  CFD-BF-002-022-F  CFD-WF-001-027-F
#>               Right            Answer  sampleAlg sampleSet
#> 1 CFD-BF-050-004-HO CFD-BF-050-004-HO validation     train
#> 2 CFD-WM-038-005-HO  CFD-WM-033-014-A validation     train
#> 3  CFD-WM-038-011-A  CFD-WM-023-012-A validation     train
#> 4  CFD-BM-038-017-F  CFD-BM-009-009-F validation     train
#> 5  CFD-WM-023-012-A  CFD-WM-033-014-A validation     train
#> 6  CFD-WF-020-027-F  CFD-WF-020-027-F validation     train
```

Here you can see the triplet judgment data for each trial for the first
participant in the experiment. Participants viewed the trials in the
same order they are listed in the matrix.

The data from each participant is a separate element in the list, and
the elements are labeled by the `worker\_id` label in the raw data file.
You can see all the subject labels as follows:

``` r
names(cfd_triplets)
#>  [1] "78972" "78103" "77827" "79088" "79377" "80900" "81492" "81753" "81157"
#> [10] "78375" "79564" "81964" "79666" "79497" "79363" "77536" "81416" "82291"
#> [19] "78399" "78416" "81182" "82531" "79471" "81233" "82327" "79457" "79996"
#> [28] "77641" "78808" "80093" "81270" "79549" "78864" "79882" "79672" "79060"
#> [37] "78383" "78332" "79028"
```

To learn more about this dataset, try
[`help(cfd_triplets)`](https://knowledge-and-concepts-lab.github.io/tripletTools/reference/cfd_triplets.md).

### Embedding data

Embedding data are `.csv` files containing embedding coordinates for
each stimulus item in the study. Depending on the study, there may be a
single *group embedding* computed from a group of participants, or
*individual embeddings* computed separately for each participant.

In both cases the `.csv` file must contain columns with the following
labels:

- *item*: A string indicating the label for the item.
- *dim_0 - dim_k*: One column for each dimension of the embedding,
  numbered beginning with zero, containing a numeric value that
  indicates the item’s location on the corresponding dimension of the
  embedding.

If a separate embedding was computed for each participant, then all
embeddings should appear within the same `.csv` file, and this should
also include the following column:

- *worker_id*: The random participant identifier, which should be the
  same as the identifier used in the triplet dataset.

To read in a group-based single embedding file you can just use standard
R:

    grpemb <- read.csv("filename.csv", row.names = "item", header = T)

For studies with separate embeddings computed for each participant, use
the `get.combined` function to read the data, setting the `eflag` flag
to `TRUE`:

    indemb <- get.combined("filename.csv", eflag = TRUE)

As with triplet data, this will create a named list where each element
contains the embedding information computed for one participant. The
elements are labeled by the participant id (`worker_id`). The
`cfd_embeddings` object contains a list of the kind returned by this
function:

``` r
head(cfd_embeddings[[1]])
#>                       dim_0       dim_1
#> CFD-BF-002-004-HO 0.3947823  0.16756907
#> CFD-BF-002-018-A  0.4886511  0.08649993
#> CFD-BF-002-022-F  0.2059984  0.10942531
#> CFD-BF-005-005-HO 0.3141250  0.12844554
#> CFD-BF-005-020-A  0.1804924 -0.31689260
#> CFD-BF-005-022-F  0.1909470 -0.32095847
```

The row names indicate the stimulus identity and the entries indicate
the coordinates of the stimulus along the first (dim_0) and second
(dim_1) dimensions of the embedding.
